#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Motivations for using Deep Belief Networks on transcriptomic data
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The motivations for using Deep Belief Networks on transcriptomic data come
 from those networks' successes when used on image data.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Highly correlated inputs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Both underlying distributions often have many correlated dimensions.
 For images, adjacent pixels often display the same object and have therefore
 correlated values.
 In face recognition for example, the faces are usually scaled and translated
 so that the centers of both eyes and mouth are aligned in different faces.
 There will be highly correlated pixels for areas of the image where the
 cheeks and lips usually are.
 If you use the pixels of the whole image as input to the neural network,
 the corresponding input nodes will be highly correlated as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For transcriptomic data, the correlations can be due to many genes being
 regulated by the same transcription factor.
 
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
TODO: add some statistics of correlations, e.g.
 in the breast_cancer data set.
 for example, find a group of genes that are all correlated in all samples
 with a correlation coefficient larger than 
\begin_inset Formula $x$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout
TODO: add some citations for reasons of high correlation in expression data.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Deep Belief Networks find correlated nodes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Deep Belief Networks can group correlated input nodes by increasing their
 weights to a single hidden node, and decreasing the weights to all other
 hidden nodes.
 This is a form of abstraction, since in this way, the many correlated input
 nodes are grouped into one hidden node.
 The hidden node will only be active if many of its highly-weighted input
 nodes are active.
 Repeated application of this principle of abstraction allows the Deep Belief
 Network to form more and more abstract representations of its input.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In face recognition for example, an abstract representation might have a
 single value for the size of the lips.
 In transcriptomic data, a single node in an abstract representation might
 encode the activity of a gene module.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
